docs/overview.rst, before:

Technical Overview
==================

This page provides an objective technical analysis of genro-storage's design, comparing it to alternative approaches and explaining when it adds value.

What is genro-storage?
-----------------------

genro-storage is a **storage abstraction layer** built on top of fsspec that provides:

1. A **unified mount-point API** similar to Unix filesystem mounting
2. **Cross-storage operations** (copy/move between different backends)
3. **Pathlib-like interface** for cloud storage
4. **Integration helpers** for web frameworks and external tools

It sits between your application code and the underlying storage systems (local filesystem, S3, GCS, Azure, etc.).

Technical Architecture
----------------------

.. code-block:: text

    Your Application
          ↓
    StorageManager (mount points)
          ↓
    StorageNode (unified API)
          ↓
    ┌─────────┬──────────┬─────────┐
    │ Local   │ fsspec   │ Base64  │ (Backend adapters)
    └─────────┴──────────┴─────────┘
          ↓         ↓         ↓
    ┌─────────┬──────────┬─────────┐
    │ OS FS   │ S3/GCS   │ Memory  │ (Actual storage)
    └─────────┴──────────┴─────────┘

**Design principles:**

- **Thin abstraction**: Minimal overhead over underlying backends
- **No lock-in**: Direct backend access always available
- **Extensible**: Easy to add custom backends
- **Production-tested**: 6+ years in Genropy framework

When to Use genro-storage
--------------------------

✅ **Good fit when you need:**

**Multi-backend applications**
  Applications that need to work with multiple storage types (local + S3, or S3 + GCS).

  *Alternative:* Writing separate code for each backend. genro-storage provides uniform API.

**Cross-storage operations**
  Copying/moving files between different storage systems.

  *Alternative:* Manual download/upload loops. genro-storage handles this internally with streaming.

**Mount-point abstraction**
  Different environments (dev/staging/prod) using different storage but same code paths.

  *Alternative:* Environment-specific code branches. genro-storage externalizes to configuration.

**Framework integration**
  Need to serve files from cloud storage through web frameworks (Flask, Django).

  *Alternative:* Generating signed URLs and redirecting. genro-storage streams efficiently.

**External tool integration**
  Running tools like ffmpeg, imagemagick that require local filesystem.

  *Alternative:* Manual temporary file management. genro-storage handles download/upload automatically.

❌ **Not recommended when:**

**Single backend, performance-critical**
  If you only use S3 and need maximum performance, boto3 directly may be 5-10% faster.

**Very large files (>1GB)**
  Streaming works but lacks chunked upload resume. Consider specialized tools.

**Complex S3 features**
  If you need advanced S3 features (lifecycle policies, bucket policies, etc.), use boto3/aioboto3.

**Async-first applications**
  Current version is synchronous. Async support planned for v0.2.0.

Comparison with Alternatives
-----------------------------

vs. fsspec directly
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**fsspec strengths:**

- More backends (30+)
- Async support (aiohttp-based)
- Lower-level control
- Larger community

**genro-storage advantages:**

- Simpler mount-point API (vs. protocol URLs)
- Cross-storage copy/move built-in
- Web framework integration (serve, WSGI)
- External tool integration (local_path context manager)
- Pathlib-like interface (more pythonic)

**Example comparison:**

.. code-block:: python

    # fsspec
    import fsspec
    s3_fs = fsspec.filesystem('s3', key='...', secret='...')
    local_fs = fsspec.filesystem('file')

    # Copy between storages requires manual streaming
    with s3_fs.open('bucket/file.txt', 'rb') as src:
        with local_fs.open('/tmp/file.txt', 'wb') as dst:
            dst.write(src.read())

    # genro-storage
    from genro_storage import StorageManager
    storage = StorageManager()
    storage.configure([
        {'name': 's3', 'type': 's3', 'bucket': 'bucket'},
        {'name': 'local', 'type': 'local', 'path': '/tmp'}
    ])
    storage.node('s3:file.txt').copy('local:file.txt')

vs. boto3/google-cloud-storage
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**SDK strengths:**

- Full API coverage (all cloud provider features)
- Official support
- More optimizations
- Async versions available (aioboto3)

**genro-storage advantages:**

- Works with multiple clouds through single API
- No cloud provider lock-in
- Easier to swap backends
- Simpler for common operations

**When to use SDKs instead:**

- Need advanced features (S3 Select, Lambda triggers, etc.)
- Performance-critical single-cloud application
- Already heavily invested in AWS/GCP ecosystem

vs. pathlib
~~~~~~~~~~~

**pathlib strengths:**

- Standard library (no dependencies)
- Fast (native C code)
- Well-known API

**genro-storage advantages:**

- Works with cloud storage, not just local
- Cross-storage operations
- Rich metadata and versioning support

**Relationship:**

genro-storage's API is *inspired by* pathlib but is not a drop-in replacement. It provides similar methods (``exists``, ``read_text``, ``mkdir``) but adds cloud-specific features.

Performance Characteristics
---------------------------

**Overhead:**

- **Local storage**: ~5-10% overhead vs. direct pathlib (mainly type checking)
- **Cloud storage**: <2% overhead vs. direct SDK (mostly in fsspec layer)
- **Cross-storage copy**: Optimized streaming, minimal memory usage

**Memory usage:**

- Streaming operations: O(1) memory (fixed buffer size)
- File reads: O(n) where n = file size (standard behavior)
- Mount registry: O(m) where m = number of mounts (typically < 10)

**Scalability:**

- Tested with 100,000+ files in production (Genropy applications)
- No global state (StorageManager instances are independent)
- Thread-safe: each StorageNode operation is atomic

**Benchmarks** (Python 3.12, 1MB file):

.. code-block:: text

    Operation                    genro-storage    Direct SDK    Overhead
    ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    Local read                         2.1ms         2.0ms        +5%
    S3 read (warm)                    45ms          44ms          +2%
    S3 write                          52ms          51ms          +2%
    Local → S3 copy                   53ms          55ms*         -3%
    S3 → local copy                   46ms          48ms*         -4%

    * Direct SDK requires manual streaming code

Production Usage
----------------

genro-storage originates from **Genropy** (https://github.com/genropy/genropy), a Python web framework in production since 2018.

**Real-world usage patterns:**

- **Document management systems**: Store user files across local + S3 with transparent switching
- **Image processing pipelines**: Download from S3, process with ImageMagick, upload results
- **Multi-tenant applications**: Per-tenant storage directories using callable paths
- **Backup systems**: Copy between local, S3, and GCS with smart skip strategies

**Production lessons learned:**

1. **Mount points simplify deployment**: Same code works in dev (local) and prod (S3) by changing config
2. **Cross-storage copy is common**: ~40% of operations involve moving data between backends
3. **External tool integration is critical**: Many workflows require ffmpeg, imagemagick, etc.
4. **WSGI serving saves infrastructure**: No need for CDN/reverse proxy for small-medium files

Limitations and Gotchas
-----------------------

**Known limitations:**

1. **No async support** (yet): All operations are synchronous. Async planned for v0.2.0.

2. **No parallel uploads**: Multi-part uploads are sequential. For large files (>1GB), consider multiprocessing.

3. **Limited transaction support**: No atomic multi-file operations. Use application-level locking if needed.

4. **Backend-specific features**: Advanced features (S3 lifecycle, GCS nearline, etc.) require direct backend access.

5. **Python 3.9+ only**: Uses modern type hints. For older Python, use direct fsspec.

**Common gotchas:**

.. code-block:: python

    # ❌ Path separators
    node = storage.node('s3:folder\\file.txt')  # Wrong on Unix
    node = storage.node('s3:folder/file.txt')   # Correct (always use /)

    # ❌ Assuming atomic operations
    node.delete()
    node.write_text("new")  # Not atomic! Use move() for atomic replace

    # ❌ Large files in memory
    data = node.read_bytes()  # Loads entire file! Use open() for streaming

When NOT to Use genro-storage
------------------------------

Be honest with yourself about whether you need it:

**❌ Single local filesystem only**
  Use pathlib. It's faster, standard library, and more familiar.

**❌ AWS-only with advanced features**
  Use boto3. You'll need it for IAM, Lambda, etc. anyway.

**❌ High-performance data pipelines**
  Consider specialized tools (rclone, s3cmd) or async libraries (aioboto3).

**❌ Need specific cloud features**
  S3 Select, GCS lifecycle, Azure CDN integration → use vendor SDKs.

**✅ Multi-backend abstraction with reasonable performance**
  That's exactly what genro-storage is for.

Migration Path
--------------

If you're using other approaches and considering genro-storage:

**From pathlib:**

Easy migration. Most operations have 1:1 equivalents:

.. code-block:: python

    # Before (pathlib)
    path = Path('/data/file.txt')
    if path.exists():
        content = path.read_text()

    # After (genro-storage)
    node = storage.node('local:file.txt')
    if node.exists:
        content = node.read_text()

**From boto3:**

Moderate effort. Basic operations are simpler, advanced features need refactoring:

.. code-block:: python

    # Before (boto3)
    s3 = boto3.client('s3')
    obj = s3.get_object(Bucket='mybucket', Key='file.txt')
    content = obj['Body'].read()

    # After (genro-storage)
    content = storage.node('s3:file.txt').read_bytes()

    # Advanced features still available via backend
    backend = storage.get_backend('s3')
    fs = backend.fs  # Access underlying fsspec/s3fs filesystem

**From fsspec:**

Small changes. Mostly API style differences:

.. code-block:: python

    # Before (fsspec)
    fs = fsspec.filesystem('s3', ...)
    with fs.open('bucket/file.txt') as f:
        content = f.read()

    # After (genro-storage)
    storage.configure([{'name': 's3', 'type': 's3', 'bucket': 'bucket'}])
    with storage.node('s3:file.txt').open() as f:
        content = f.read()

Design Decisions
----------------

**Why mount points?**

Inspired by Unix filesystem mounting. Provides:

- Clear separation of "where" (mount) and "what" (path)
- Easy environment-specific configuration
- Intuitive mental model for developers

**Why not async?**

Original extraction from Genropy (2018) predates widespread async adoption. Async support is planned for v0.2.0 but requires significant refactoring.

**Why fsspec as foundation?**

- Battle-tested (used by Dask, intake, zarr)
- 30+ backends already implemented
- Active community
- Python-native (vs. rclone's Go, s3cmd's issues)

**Why custom LocalStorage backend?**

fsspec's LocalFileSystem has some quirks (absolute paths required, Windows issues). Custom backend provides:

- Relative path support
- Better Windows compatibility
- Consistent behavior across platforms
- Slightly better performance for local operations

Contributing and Extending
---------------------------

**Adding custom backends:**

Easy! Implement the ``StorageBackend`` interface:

.. code-block:: python

    from genro_storage.backends import StorageBackend

    class CustomBackend(StorageBackend):
        def read_bytes(self, path: str) -> bytes:
            # Your implementation
            pass

        def write_bytes(self, path: str, data: bytes) -> None:
            # Your implementation
            pass

        # ... implement other methods

    # Register
    storage.register_backend_type('custom', CustomBackend)

**See Also:**

- :doc:`backends` - Backend configuration reference
- :doc:`advanced` - Advanced features guide
- :doc:`api` - Complete API documentation
- :doc:`contributing` - Contributing guidelines

Commit message:

docs: Correct historical timeline - Genropy since 2006, storage abstraction since 2018
Fix historical accuracy:
- Genropy web framework: in production since 2006 (19+ years)
- Storage abstraction layer: introduced in 2018 (6+ years)

Updated in:
- README.md (status section and origins)
- docs/overview.rst (production usage section)
- docs/changelog.rst (technical details)

Credits the full history of Genropy while being accurate about when
the storage abstraction was created.

docs/overview.rst, after:

Technical Overview
==================

This page provides an objective technical analysis of genro-storage's design, comparing it to alternative approaches and explaining when it adds value.

What is genro-storage?
-----------------------

genro-storage is a **storage abstraction layer** built on top of fsspec that provides:

1. A **unified mount-point API** similar to Unix filesystem mounting
2. **Cross-storage operations** (copy/move between different backends)
3. **Pathlib-like interface** for cloud storage
4. **Integration helpers** for web frameworks and external tools

It sits between your application code and the underlying storage systems (local filesystem, S3, GCS, Azure, etc.).

Technical Architecture
----------------------

.. code-block:: text

    Your Application
          ↓
    StorageManager (mount points)
          ↓
    StorageNode (unified API)
          ↓
    ┌─────────┬──────────┬─────────┐
    │ Local   │ fsspec   │ Base64  │ (Backend adapters)
    └─────────┴──────────┴─────────┘
          ↓         ↓         ↓
    ┌─────────┬──────────┬─────────┐
    │ OS FS   │ S3/GCS   │ Memory  │ (Actual storage)
    └─────────┴──────────┴─────────┘

**Design principles:**

- **Thin abstraction**: Minimal overhead over underlying backends
- **No lock-in**: Direct backend access always available
- **Extensible**: Easy to add custom backends
- **Production-tested**: 6+ years in Genropy framework

When to Use genro-storage
--------------------------

✅ **Good fit when you need:**

**Multi-backend applications**
  Applications that need to work with multiple storage types (local + S3, or S3 + GCS).

  *Alternative:* Writing separate code for each backend. genro-storage provides uniform API.

**Cross-storage operations**
  Copying/moving files between different storage systems.

  *Alternative:* Manual download/upload loops. genro-storage handles this internally with streaming.

**Mount-point abstraction**
  Different environments (dev/staging/prod) using different storage but same code paths.

  *Alternative:* Environment-specific code branches. genro-storage externalizes to configuration.

**Framework integration**
  Need to serve files from cloud storage through web frameworks (Flask, Django).

  *Alternative:* Generating signed URLs and redirecting. genro-storage streams efficiently.

**External tool integration**
  Running tools like ffmpeg, imagemagick that require local filesystem.

  *Alternative:* Manual temporary file management. genro-storage handles download/upload automatically.

❌ **Not recommended when:**

**Single backend, performance-critical**
  If you only use S3 and need maximum performance, boto3 directly may be 5-10% faster.

**Very large files (>1GB)**
  Streaming works but lacks chunked upload resume. Consider specialized tools.

**Complex S3 features**
  If you need advanced S3 features (lifecycle policies, bucket policies, etc.), use boto3/aioboto3.

**Async-first applications**
  Current version is synchronous. Async support planned for v0.2.0.

Comparison with Alternatives
-----------------------------

vs. fsspec directly
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**fsspec strengths:**

- More backends (30+)
- Async support (aiohttp-based)
- Lower-level control
- Larger community

**genro-storage advantages:**

- Simpler mount-point API (vs. protocol URLs)
- Cross-storage copy/move built-in
- Web framework integration (serve, WSGI)
- External tool integration (local_path context manager)
- Pathlib-like interface (more pythonic)

**Example comparison:**

.. code-block:: python

    # fsspec
    import fsspec
    s3_fs = fsspec.filesystem('s3', key='...', secret='...')
    local_fs = fsspec.filesystem('file')

    # Copy between storages requires manual streaming
    with s3_fs.open('bucket/file.txt', 'rb') as src:
        with local_fs.open('/tmp/file.txt', 'wb') as dst:
            dst.write(src.read())

    # genro-storage
    from genro_storage import StorageManager
    storage = StorageManager()
    storage.configure([
        {'name': 's3', 'type': 's3', 'bucket': 'bucket'},
        {'name': 'local', 'type': 'local', 'path': '/tmp'}
    ])
    storage.node('s3:file.txt').copy('local:file.txt')

vs. boto3/google-cloud-storage
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**SDK strengths:**

- Full API coverage (all cloud provider features)
- Official support
- More optimizations
- Async versions available (aioboto3)

**genro-storage advantages:**

- Works with multiple clouds through single API
- No cloud provider lock-in
- Easier to swap backends
- Simpler for common operations

**When to use SDKs instead:**

- Need advanced features (S3 Select, Lambda triggers, etc.)
- Performance-critical single-cloud application
- Already heavily invested in AWS/GCP ecosystem

vs. pathlib
~~~~~~~~~~~

**pathlib strengths:**

- Standard library (no dependencies)
- Fast (native C code)
- Well-known API

**genro-storage advantages:**

- Works with cloud storage, not just local
- Cross-storage operations
- Rich metadata and versioning support

**Relationship:**

genro-storage's API is *inspired by* pathlib but is not a drop-in replacement. It provides similar methods (``exists``, ``read_text``, ``mkdir``) but adds cloud-specific features.

Performance Characteristics
---------------------------

**Overhead:**

- **Local storage**: ~5-10% overhead vs. direct pathlib (mainly type checking)
- **Cloud storage**: <2% overhead vs. direct SDK (mostly in fsspec layer)
- **Cross-storage copy**: Optimized streaming, minimal memory usage

**Memory usage:**

- Streaming operations: O(1) memory (fixed buffer size)
- File reads: O(n) where n = file size (standard behavior)
- Mount registry: O(m) where m = number of mounts (typically < 10)

**Scalability:**

- Tested with 100,000+ files in production (Genropy applications)
- No global state (StorageManager instances are independent)
- Thread-safe: each StorageNode operation is atomic

**Benchmarks** (Python 3.12, 1MB file):

.. code-block:: text

    Operation                    genro-storage    Direct SDK    Overhead
    ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    Local read                         2.1ms         2.0ms        +5%
    S3 read (warm)                    45ms          44ms          +2%
    S3 write                          52ms          51ms          +2%
    Local → S3 copy                   53ms          55ms*         -3%
    S3 → local copy                   46ms          48ms*         -4%

    * Direct SDK requires manual streaming code

Production Usage
----------------

genro-storage originates from **Genropy** (https://github.com/genropy/genropy), a Python web framework in production since 2006. The storage abstraction layer was introduced in 2018 and has been refined over 6+ years of production use.

**Real-world usage patterns:**

- **Document management systems**: Store user files across local + S3 with transparent switching
- **Image processing pipelines**: Download from S3, process with ImageMagick, upload results
- **Multi-tenant applications**: Per-tenant storage directories using callable paths
- **Backup systems**: Copy between local, S3, and GCS with smart skip strategies

**Production lessons learned:**

1. **Mount points simplify deployment**: Same code works in dev (local) and prod (S3) by changing config
2. **Cross-storage copy is common**: ~40% of operations involve moving data between backends
3. **External tool integration is critical**: Many workflows require ffmpeg, imagemagick, etc.
4. **WSGI serving saves infrastructure**: No need for CDN/reverse proxy for small-medium files

Limitations and Gotchas
-----------------------

**Known limitations:**

1. **No async support** (yet): All operations are synchronous. Async planned for v0.2.0.

2. **No parallel uploads**: Multi-part uploads are sequential. For large files (>1GB), consider multiprocessing.

3. **Limited transaction support**: No atomic multi-file operations. Use application-level locking if needed.

4. **Backend-specific features**: Advanced features (S3 lifecycle, GCS nearline, etc.) require direct backend access.

5. **Python 3.9+ only**: Uses modern type hints. For older Python, use direct fsspec.

**Common gotchas:**

.. code-block:: python

    # ❌ Path separators
    node = storage.node('s3:folder\\file.txt')  # Wrong on Unix
    node = storage.node('s3:folder/file.txt')   # Correct (always use /)

    # ❌ Assuming atomic operations
    node.delete()
    node.write_text("new")  # Not atomic! Use move() for atomic replace

    # ❌ Large files in memory
    data = node.read_bytes()  # Loads entire file! Use open() for streaming

When NOT to Use genro-storage
------------------------------

Be honest with yourself about whether you need it:

**❌ Single local filesystem only**
  Use pathlib. It's faster, standard library, and more familiar.

**❌ AWS-only with advanced features**
  Use boto3. You'll need it for IAM, Lambda, etc. anyway.

**❌ High-performance data pipelines**
  Consider specialized tools (rclone, s3cmd) or async libraries (aioboto3).

**❌ Need specific cloud features**
  S3 Select, GCS lifecycle, Azure CDN integration → use vendor SDKs.

**✅ Multi-backend abstraction with reasonable performance**
  That's exactly what genro-storage is for.

Migration Path
--------------

If you're using other approaches and considering genro-storage:

**From pathlib:**

Easy migration. Most operations have 1:1 equivalents:

.. code-block:: python

    # Before (pathlib)
    path = Path('/data/file.txt')
    if path.exists():
        content = path.read_text()

    # After (genro-storage)
    node = storage.node('local:file.txt')
    if node.exists:
        content = node.read_text()

**From boto3:**

Moderate effort. Basic operations are simpler, advanced features need refactoring:

.. code-block:: python

    # Before (boto3)
    s3 = boto3.client('s3')
    obj = s3.get_object(Bucket='mybucket', Key='file.txt')
    content = obj['Body'].read()

    # After (genro-storage)
    content = storage.node('s3:file.txt').read_bytes()

    # Advanced features still available via backend
    backend = storage.get_backend('s3')
    fs = backend.fs  # Access underlying fsspec/s3fs filesystem

**From fsspec:**

Small changes. Mostly API style differences:

.. code-block:: python

    # Before (fsspec)
    fs = fsspec.filesystem('s3', ...)
    with fs.open('bucket/file.txt') as f:
        content = f.read()

    # After (genro-storage)
    storage.configure([{'name': 's3', 'type': 's3', 'bucket': 'bucket'}])
    with storage.node('s3:file.txt').open() as f:
        content = f.read()

Design Decisions
----------------

**Why mount points?**

Inspired by Unix filesystem mounting. Provides:

- Clear separation of "where" (mount) and "what" (path)
- Easy environment-specific configuration
- Intuitive mental model for developers

**Why not async?**

Original extraction from Genropy (2018) predates widespread async adoption. Async support is planned for v0.2.0 but requires significant refactoring.

**Why fsspec as foundation?**

- Battle-tested (used by Dask, intake, zarr)
- 30+ backends already implemented
- Active community
- Python-native (vs. rclone's Go, s3cmd's issues)

**Why custom LocalStorage backend?**

fsspec's LocalFileSystem has some quirks (absolute paths required, Windows issues). Custom backend provides:

- Relative path support
- Better Windows compatibility
- Consistent behavior across platforms
- Slightly better performance for local operations

Contributing and Extending
---------------------------

**Adding custom backends:**

Easy! Implement the ``StorageBackend`` interface:

.. code-block:: python

    from genro_storage.backends import StorageBackend

    class CustomBackend(StorageBackend):
        def read_bytes(self, path: str) -> bytes:
            # Your implementation
            pass

        def write_bytes(self, path: str, data: bytes) -> None:
            # Your implementation
            pass

        # ... implement other methods

    # Register
    storage.register_backend_type('custom', CustomBackend)

**See Also:**

- :doc:`backends` - Backend configuration reference
- :doc:`advanced` - Advanced features guide
- :doc:`api` - Complete API documentation
- :doc:`contributing` - Contributing guidelines
